Jaap van Muijden: Welcome
to Metal Enhancements
for A13 Bionic.
My name is
Jaap van Muijden,
from the GPU Software team
at Apple.
Today I’m going to introduce you
to the latest Apple-designed GPU
in the A13 Bionic,
and the new Metal features
it enables.
I will then then show you
how to use those features
to reduce your app’s
memory usage,
and optimize its run-time
performance.
The new A13 Bionic
continues the rapid evolution
of Apple-designed GPUs
by focusing
on three major areas:
general performance,
architectural improvements
that better meet the evolving
needs of modern apps,
and advanced Metal features.
Let’s take a look at each.
The GPU in A13 Bionic
is almost three times faster
than the A10 Fusion
in general performance,
and builds on the great
performance improvements
of the A11 and A12 Bionic GPUs.
Existing apps run faster
on the A13
and can complete
each frame in less time,
which in turn
leads to power savings
and extended app usage.
The Apple-designed GPU
architecture has quickly evolved
to better meet the demands
of modern apps.
Beginning with the A11,
the 16-bit floating point and
texturing rates were increased
to alleviate common
bottlenecks in games,
and the numerical accuracy
of 32-bit floating point
operations were improved
to better handle
advanced compute workloads.
The A12 GPU greatly improves
memory bandwidth
by losslessly compressing and
decompressing texture content
to and from memory.
It also adds dedicated hardware
to support the user interface,
ensuring even faster
response times,
but also reducing the impact of
UI elements on foreground apps.
And the A12 and later GPUs
enhance the iPad experience
by sharing its resources
between apps more efficiently.
And now we have the A13 GPU.
The A13 GPU architecture
greatly improves the processing
of high dynamic range content
on the GPU,
by doubling the rate of 16-bit
floating point operations
and adding support
for small 16-bit numbers
that better preserve
black levels.
The A13 GPU also provides
significantly better support
for independent compute work
that executes concurrently
with rendering workloads.
Apple-designed GPUs
have supported
this asynchronous compute
capability since the A9,
but the A13 GPU
takes it to the next level
by adding more hardware
channels and minimizing impact
to the more deadline-sensitive
rendering tasks.
Now before we describe the
new Metal features of the A13,
let’s also quickly recap
some of the major Metal features
introduced on the A11
and A12 GPUs.
Let’s start with the A11.
Tile shading, imageblocks, and
persistent threadgroup memory
all are features
designed to explicitly leverage
Apple’s tile-based
deferred rendering architecture
and work together
to optimize the bandwidth usage
of many modern
rendering techniques.
Rasterization order groups
allow you to manage complex,
per-pixel data structures
on the GPU,
and color rate control
optimizes the use of
multi-sample anti-aliasing
in advanced
rendering algorithms.
And now on to the A12.
Layered rendering
lets each rendered primitive
target a unique slice
of a 2D texture array,
while multi-viewport rendering
lets each primitive do the same
for up to 16 viewports
and scissor rectangles.
Stencil feedback
lets each fragment
set a unique
stencil reference value
for advanced per-pixel effects,
while stencil resolve
allows for stencil buffer reuse
across MSAA and non-MSAA passes.
And although
lossless compression
is enabled by default
wherever possible,
Metal also provides
direct control
over in-place compression
and decompression
of shared storage mode textures
when optimal readback
is required.
So now let’s introduce
the new Apple GPU Family 6
that supports the A13 GPU.
Sparse textures enable
higher-quality texture streaming
for open-world games
at a fixed memory budget,
by tracking the most important
regions of each texture
and then mapping only those
regions to memory.
Rasterization rate
maps focus high-quality
rasterization and shading to the
image areas that matter most,
while reducing rates elsewhere,
saving both memory
and performance.
Vertex amplification eliminates
redundant vertex processing
that would otherwise occur
with layered renders
that share geometry.
GPU-driven pipelines
enable you to draw larger
and more immersive scenes,
and with argument buffer tier 2,
apps can execute
their GPU-driven workloads
more flexibly than ever before.
SIMD group instructions
optimize sharing
and synchronization
among the threads of
an SIMD group during shading.
And ASTC HDR brings
high-quality lossy compression
to high-dynamic range textures,
saving significant
memory and bandwidth.
Let’s look at each of these
in more detail,
starting with sparse textures.
Sparse textures
is a brand new feature
introduced
on the A13 GPU
that let you control the storage
and residency of Metal textures
at a fine granularity.
Sparse textures are not
fully resident in memory.
But instead, you can allocate
sections of them
on a special memory heap
called a sparse heap.
Here you can see
two sparse textures
that have parts of their data
allocated in such a sparse heap.
A single heap
can provide storage
for many sparse textures,
all sharing a single
pre-allocated pool of memory.
All sparse textures are split up
in units called sparse tiles,
which have the same
memory footprint
independent of texture
resolution or pixel format.
So what are the applications
of this feature?
One of them
is texture streaming.
Texture streaming lets you
render incredibly large scenes
with a fixed memory footprint
by loading only
the texture mipmaps
that are needed
for the current view.
With traditional
texture streaming,
individual mipmaps
are loaded when required
and evicted
when no longer needed,
or when more important textures
need the memory.
Texture streaming traditionally
manages texture residency
at mipmap granularity.
The lowest levels of the
mipmap pyramid are kept resident
in case a higher quality
mipmap is requested,
but not yet streamed in.
It may not be available yet
because the loading operation
has not completed,
or there is insufficient
allocated streaming memory.
Having the lowest level
mipmaps available
ensures that there is always
some valid data to sample,
even though
it is of lower resolution.
Metal’s sparse texture feature
improves on this texture
streaming model in two ways.
First, sparse textures
provide texture access counters
that you can use to determine
how often each region
of a sparse texture is accessed.
This lets you prioritize
texture loading,
as regions that are accessed
more often by the renderer
are generally more visible
in the current view.
Secondly, residency
can be managed
at the sparse tile granularity
instead of mipmap granularity.
This lets you
be even more efficient
with your texture memory,
and allows for more visible
texture detail where it counts.
Taken together, sparse textures
let you stream
more visible detail
with the same memory budget,
improving quality.
Now let’s look at
how you create and use
sparse textures in Metal.
To start using sparse textures,
you first create a sparse heap
and then allocate
one or more textures from it.
New sparse textures
are created initially
without any mapped sparse tiles.
You need to request memory
mappings from the heap
using the GPU.
The memory is mapped
in tile-sized units
called sparse tiles,
similar to virtual memory pages.
Likewise, you need request
the GPU to unmap tiles
when they are no longer needed.
Sampling a sparse texture works
just like a regular texture,
and sampling unmapped regions
return zeros.
Finally, the texture
access counters
can be read back
from a sparse texture,
to get estimates for
how often each tile is accessed,
so that you can precisely
control and prioritize
when you map tiles
for your textures.
Let’s look at each
of these steps in more detail.
Here we have some Metal code
that creates
a sparse texture heap
with a given memory size.
We first calculate
the size of our heap,
and make sure it is a multiple
of the sparse tile size.
Here we use
a local helper function
to round up our data size
to the nearest multiple
of the sparse tile size.
We can then generate
the sparse heap descriptor;
we set the heap type to sparse,
and specify the size
of our heap in bytes.
We then create the sparse heap
using our MTLDevice object.
Creating a sparse texture
is very easy.
First, we create
a texture descriptor as normal,
and then we create the texture
using the sparse heap object.
Now that we have seen how you
can create the sparse texture,
let’s take a look at how
to map regions onto memory.
The mapping and unmapping
of regions of a texture
is done by encoding
map and unmap commands
in a resource state
command encoder.
This encoder
can be used to schedule
the map and unmap operations
on the GPU timeline,
similar to encoding other
render commands in Metal.
Let’s see how this looks
in code.
First we create the encoder.
And then we simply
encode a map operation;
we specify the texture
and what regions,
slice, and mip level
of the texture we want to map.
The region is now mapped,
and you can blit
or create your texture data
onto the mapped memory.
To unmap a section,
we follow the same procedure;
the only difference is the mode
of the update we encode.
Now that you have created
and mapped our texture data,
let’s move on to
the sampling of sparse textures.
Sampling from a sparse texture
is no different
than sampling
from a normal texture.
There is well-defined behavior
in case an unmapped section
is accessed.
Sampling an unmapped region
returns a vector of zeroes,
and any writes are discarded.
In addition to the standard
sampling functions,
Metal provides
a sparse_sample function
that can be used in shaders
to test for unmapped regions.
Now that you’ve seen
how to create, map,
and sample sparse textures,
let’s look at
a simple implementation.
One way to efficiently sample
sparse textures
is to perform fallback sampling.
In your shader, you can
first try to fetch texels
using the sparse_sample method,
and if that fails,
you can fall back
to a lower-level mipmap.
By always keeping
the lower mipmap loaded,
you are guaranteed
to find a valid sample.
And to better support
fallback sampling,
the Metal shading language
also supports a new argument
on texture methods
called min LOD clamp.
Min LOD clamp lets you set
the highest mipmap in the chain
that can be accessed.
This lets you guarantee
a valid sample
by specifying the highest mipmap
that you know you have data for.
Let’s look at that in code.
Here we have a fragment shader
that samples
from a sparse texture.
You start sampling
your sparse texture
using the sparse_sample method,
which returns
a sparse_color object.
You can then call the resident
method on the returned object
to determine if the GPU
sampled mapped data.
If it did, you retrieve
the sampled value and return it.
Otherwise you sample
the sparse texture again,
but this time with an LOD clamp
to force the sampler
to bypass higher mipmaps.
Since you guaranteed
that this mipmap
and lower mipmaps have data,
the second sampling call is made
using the normal sample method.
Now that you’ve seen
the functions
for mapping and sampling
sparse texture data,
let’s talk a little bit
about how to decide
when to map or free
sparse texture tiles.
Traditional texture streaming
systems
manually collect
app-level statistics
to help prioritize
texture residency.
These methods are often coarse
at the mipmap
or mesh granularity
to help manage the overhead.
Metal instead supports
a fine-grained solution
called texture access counters.
These counters accurately track
how often sparse tiles
are accessed by the GPU
with very low overhead.
Texture access counters
are queried from the GPU.
Let’s look at how this works.
This Metal example will collect
the texture access counters
from the GPU.
You start by creating a buffer
to contain the sampled counters.
And then you encode a blit
to copy the counters
from our sparse texture
to our buffer,
specifying the mip level, slice,
and region you’re interested in.
Traditional texture
streaming techniques
have served us very well
over the years,
and given a fixed memory budget,
we can stream in the mip levels
for the textures that user sees.
When the texture budget
gets exhausted,
we can no longer stream
in higher resolution mip levels
and we start seeing
uniformly blurry textures.
But with sparse textures,
you can now get a better usage
of your memory.
You can map the memory
to make room
for the individual texture tiles
that the user sees,
at the quality level that is
most appropriate
for each texture tile
within a given mip level.
This allows you
to distribute texture memory
for the tiles that make
the most visual impact.
Additionally, this feature
saves bandwidth
when streaming textures,
as the sparse texture API
allows you to map and unmap
individual tiles
instead of having to copy
and rearrange
entire mipmap chains in memory
during streaming.
That’s it for sparse textures,
a really important
memory optimization
that will also improve
texture streaming quality.
Now let’s move on to the runtime
optimization technique
called rasterization rate maps.
Rasterization rate maps
let you make better use
of Retina displays
by rasterizing and shading
the image areas that matter most
at highest resolution,
while reducing quality
where it's not perceived.
Rasterization rate maps
let you rasterize and shade
at multiple resolutions
by defining both a screen space
and physical render target size,
and a nonuniform mapping
between the two spaces,
to control the quality
of each region.
The physical resolution is
smaller than the screen space,
saving bandwidth and reducing
the memory footprint.
And the nonuniform mapping
results in higher-quality
visuals
than the uniform upscale
often used in games
at a fraction of the cost
of rendering the entire screen
at native resolution.
Let’s take a closer look
at how this works.
Here is a screenshot
of a diffuse layer
from the g-buffer
of a sample renderer.
Traditional rendering
draws geometry
by calculating the screen space
coordinates of each vertex,
and then rasterizing
the resulting primitives
in screen space
to produce fragments.
These screen space coordinates
have a one-to-one mapping
to the coordinates of
the physical render target
during rasterization.
With rasterization rate maps,
you can configure the rasterizer
to map screen space coordinates
unevenly when creating fragments
thus reducing the number
of total fragments produced
and simultaneously rendering
to a smaller render target.
In both images,
the white grid corresponds
to an evenly spaced grid
in virtual screen space.
But as you can see here,
it is distributed unevenly
in physical space.
In this example, we’ve used
rasterization rate maps
to keep the screen resolution
in the center of the screen,
but reducing it towards
the edges of the screen.
To see this more clearly,
let’s zoom in
on one of the center tiles.
The resolution
of this physical tile
matches the resolution
of the same region
within the g-buffer.
But as you move towards
the edge of the screen,
the quality is reduced
by effectively reducing
the physical space
dedicated to that tile.
This leads to a distorted image
in your physical image,
but we will show
that this mapping
can be reversed to create
an undistorted final image.
But first, let’s take a look
at how the mappings are defined.
The mapping is defined
as two 1D functions
in the X and Y axes
of the screen space.
You describe these functions
in Metal
using a series of control points
defining the quality
requirements.
In this image, we can see
the effective rasterization rate
across the screen,
given our two 1D functions
along the axis.
A quality level of one means
that fragment shader is invoked
for every screen space pixel
along the axis.
And a quality level of .5
means that for at least
50 percent of the pixels,
a fragment shader
is invoked along a given axis.
A quality level of zero means
that each fragment shader
will be invoked at the minimum
rate supported by Metal.
Metal will resample
these control points
to create a final rate map.
Even though you don’t control
the final mapping directly,
Metal guarantees that your
minimum quality is preserved.
Now let’s create this mapping
with Metal.
Here is the Metal code
that builds the rasterization
rate map you just saw.
First, you define
the rasterization function.
In this example we will use the
five values we showed previously
for both the horizontal
and vertical axis of our map.
You then fill
the layer descriptor
to describe the quality across
our rasterization rate map.
You then create one
by providing the horizontal
and vertical quality functions.
With your quality defined,
you now create
a Metal rasterization
rate map descriptor
from the layer descriptor
and our final screen space
resolution.
Finally, you use your
Metal device
to instantiate
a rasterization rate map object
using that descriptor.
Next we need to create
the physical render target
for this map.
Because the actual
rasterization rate map rates
are implementation dependent,
you need to first query the
physical size of the resource
from the map.
You then create the physical
render target as usual:
specify the correct usage
and storage properties,
and instantiate the texture
using your Metal device object.
Finally, you combine the created
texture and rasterization map
to set up your render pass
and render as usual.
And with that,
you have rasterized
your g-buffer nonuniformly.
But what about shading
the g-buffer in later passes?
With a traditional
deferred shading pipeline,
you can continue lighting
with the same
rasterization rate map
because your light geometry
will get correctly rasterized
in the same screen space
as your g-buffer.
With tiled deferred renderers,
you will need to do
a little more work.
If you’re not already familiar
with the tiled deferred
rendering,
please see our Modern Rendering
with Metal talk at WWDC 2019.
With tiled deferred,
your render target's
physical space
is split into equally sized
blocks of pixels
and each block performs
light tile culling and shading.
In the presented image,
our sample code shows a heat map
for the number of lights
per block of 32 by 32 pixels.
Because screen space no longer
corresponds to physical space,
integrating rasterization
rate maps
with tiled deferred renderers
requires one additional step.
The lighting shader
will need to transform
the pixel coordinates
in physical space
to the virtual screen space.
This is the reverse mapping
used during rasterization.
Let’s take a look at how you
can perform this reverse mapping
in your shaders.
First you have to make
the rasterization rate map
parameters
accessible to the shader.
To do this, first you
create a MTLBuffer
that can hold the parameters.
You then copy
the parameter data
into a MTLBuffer.
And finally, bind the MTLBuffer
to your shader.
Now that the map is bound,
let’s use it.
In the shader,
you now have access
to a rasterization_rate_map_data
object
at the corresponding
buffer bind point.
You can use that object
to instantiate
a rasterization_rate_map
_decoder object.
And then use the decoder
to transform between the
physical and screen coordinates.
Returning to our tiled
deferred renderer,
we use the decoder
to perform tile culling
in the virtual screen space.
Adapting your light culling
to virtual screen space
means your tiles
are no longer square,
but now follow the correct area
in screen space.
Let’s compare this heat map
to the full, uniform
resolution render.
And back to the
rasterization rate map version.
As you can see,
with rasterization rate maps,
we’ve significantly reduced
the amount of shaded tiles
on our screen.
Finally, let’s consider
how rasterization rate maps
are prepared for compositing
and final presentation.
Before displaying
the final image to the screen,
you need to unwrap it
using a full screen pass
that transforms
the physical space texture
to a high-resolution surface
using the shader mapping
just described.
As you can see,
it is very difficult
to notice the quality trade-offs
despite the aggressive falloffs
that were chosen
for this sample.
We expect
rasterization rate maps
to be combined
with other techniques,
such as depth of field,
to hide the quality tradeoff.
That’s it for
rasterization rate maps.
Let’s move on
to vertex amplification.
Vertex amplification lets you
reduce geometry processing
in multi-view rendering cases.
Multi-layer and multi-viewport
rendering
reduce the number
of draw calls needed
to target each view
using instancing.
But that doesn’t
eliminate the GPU cost
of processing
each of these instances.
Many multi-layer
and multi-viewport
rendering techniques share
geometry between views.
For example, between the
cascades of shadow maps
or the sides
of an environment map.
Each of those instances
typically transform
that geometry
in almost the same way.
So even though
the position is unique per view,
attributes such as
normals, tangents,
and texture coordinates
are identical.
Vertex amplification
lets you process
those shared attributes
only once,
increasing the efficiency
of your vertex shading.
Let’s consider the use case
of cascaded shadow maps
in more detail.
Depending on the view distance,
a renderer might
split its shadow maps
into one, two, or three or more
overlapping shadow cascades.
As we increase
the number of cascades,
we also increase the size
of the virtual world
that each cascade covers.
This causes the larger,
more distant cascades
to accumulate
more geometry in them,
compared to closer cascades.
And with more cascades,
the number of objects
that render into more than one
cascade increases.
Now let’s consider
how cascaded shadow maps
are traditionally rendered
and the associated costs.
Before multi-view rendering,
you would simply draw
into each cascade separately.
This increased both
the GPU and CPU overhead.
Each vertex must be fetched
and shaded multiple times,
and each vertex
is also output multiple times.
Multi-view instance rendering
uses the instance ID
to map each primitive
to its destination view.
It eliminates the CPU cost
of multiple draw calls,
but the GPU cost
remains the same.
Using instancing
for layered rendering
also complicates rendering
of actual instanced geometry,
since instance ID
now has to encode
both the actual instance ID
and the target layer.
Vertex amplification
eliminates the duplicate fetch,
shading, and output.
It also provides
a separate amplification ID.
Let’s take a look at a vertex
amplification in action.
Existing vertex functions
can be easily adapted
to vertex amplification.
In this example,
we’re going to calculate
a unique position
per amplification,
but share the color calculation
across all amplifications.
We start by declaring
our VertexOutput
with two attributes.
The compiler can usually infer
if an attribute
is unique or shared,
but for complicated shaders,
you can also be explicit
about which attributes
are shared.
The compiler
will report an error
when shared
attribute calculations
are dependent
on amplification ID.
Next we declare
a function argument
holding the amplification ID.
Any calculations
associated with this ID
are amplified
per shader invocation.
The color attribute is not
associated with that ID
so it will only
be executed once.
But the position
is dependent on the ID
to look up the correct
view projection matrix,
and so the entire
expression is amplified.
That’s it for the shader code.
Now let's see how we set up
the amplified draw calls.
Let’s start by creating
a pipeline state object
that enables amplification.
The maximum amplification factor
supported by Metal
can be queried
from the device.
In this case, let’s say you want
an amplification factor of two.
If supported, you set
to maximum amplification factor
for the pipeline.
If not supported,
you can fall back
to traditional multi-view
through instancing
or rely on doing
multiple draw calls.
Finally, you create
the pipeline.
Once the pipeline is created,
and assuming that amplification
is supported,
you can start
to encode your draws.
Drawing with amplification
requires
setting the amplification count
and binding the viewMappings.
viewMappings describe
how to map the amplification ID
to target layer or viewport.
If the vertex shader
also exports a render target
or viewport array index,
that index will serve
as a base offset
into the viewMappings array.
Now you can set
the desired amplification
and encode the draws.
Let’s take a closer look through
the Metal frame debugger.
In this sample render,
we use VertexAmplification
to amplify all the draws
that are rendered
to both cascades 2 and 3.
Here we see that this draw call
is rendered with a ViewMapping
that specifies
two render targets.
The mesh is rendered
simultaneously
into the second cascade
shown on the left,
and the third cascade,
shown both on the right
and in the geometry viewer.
That’s it for vertex
amplification.
Let’s move on
to argument buffers
and how they’ve
been extended for the A13.
We introduced argument buffers
with Metal 2.
Argument buffers allow you
to encode constants, textures,
samplers, and buffer arguments
into MTLBuffers.
By encoding all your
draw arguments
into a single Metal
argument buffer,
you can render complex scenes
with minimal CPU overhead.
Once encoded,
you can reuse argument buffers
to avoid repeated redundant
resource binding.
Argument buffers
are also necessary
to enable GPU-driven pipelines,
by providing access to the
entire scene’s draw arguments
on the GPU.
You can then modify argument
buffers in compute functions
to dynamically configure
your scene, just in time.
Tier 2 argument buffers
dramatically enhance
the capabilities
of argument buffers.
With A13, your Metal functions
can sample or write
to any texture
in an argument buffer.
You can also access a virtually
unlimited number of textures
and many samplers.
And argument buffers
can now also reference
other argument buffers with
multiple levels of indirection.
This unlocks the ability to
encode a single argument buffer
for all your scene data
and access it in your draw
without needing to assemble
argument buffers ahead of time
on GPU or CPU.
Let’s look at an example.
Here is an example scene
object model hierarchy.
We showed a similar example at
our Modern Rendering with Metal
talk at WWDC 2019.
The hierarchy describes
all your geometry data,
materials, and model data.
With argument buffers,
we can encode
this object model directly.
But with Tier 2 support
we can also use the hierarchy
directly during rendering.
Let’s take a look
at an example shader.
To start,
recall that our argument buffers
are declared
in the Metal shading language
as structures of constants,
textures, samplers, and buffers.
These declarations
directly mirror
the example object hierarchy
just described.
The first is our
material representation,
and the second is our scene
that references the set of
meshes, materials, and models.
OK, so now let’s take a look
at a fragment function
that shades using
our scene directly.
The first function parameter
is our scene argument buffer.
The second function parameter
is our per-draw constants.
In this example, it encodes
the model ID for this draw,
as well as the discrete
level of detail,
both chosen
in an earlier compute pass.
We then use these IDs
to fetch our material
from the scene
using the IDs computed earlier.
And we calculate the fragment
color using the textures,
constants, and samplers
from the nested argument buffer.
And that’s it!
No more intervening compute pass
to gather material parameters
into per-draw argument buffers.
The fragment shader
just uses the scene
argument buffer directly.
Before we move on though,
I’d like to highlight
the robust tool support
for argument buffers.
With argument buffers
and GPU-driven pipelines,
your scene setup
moves to the GPU,
and so does any debugging.
The Metal frame debugger allows
you to easily debug and inspect
both argument buffers
and the shaders that use them.
You can use the buffer viewer
to inspect all resources
in your argument buffer,
and quickly jump
to these resources
for further inspection.
You can also use
the shader debugger
to understand how your shaders
are accessing or building
argument buffers.
This is especially important
when calculating
argument buffer indices
or modifying argument buffers
on the GPU.
That's it for Tier 2
argument buffers.
Now let’s move on to a new class
of shader optimization
techniques.
SIMD group functions
are a powerful tool
for optimizing compute
and graphics functions.
They allow a GPU workload
to share data
and control flow information
by leveraging the architecture
of the GPU.
Let's unpack that
by quickly reviewing
the SIMD execution model
in Metal.
Metal has always organized
threads into SIMD groups
to exploit
the single Instruction,
multiple data nature of GPUs.
You may have leveraged
SIMD groups
in Metal compute functions
to reduce the costs
of synchronizing
entire threadgroups by using
SIMD group barriers instead.
The threads of a SIMD group
execute in lockstep,
so execution barriers
are not needed.
A SIMD group barrier therefore
only synchronizes
memory operations.
SIMD group functions
exploit this lockstep execution
to share data
between its threads
using registers instead of
threadgroup memory,
and can significantly improve
performance
when threadgroup memory bound.
They’re also available for both
compute and render functions.
And as we’ll see in a bit,
this enables
a very interesting render
optimization technique.
Let’s first start by building
a better intuition
for SIMD execution
with an example.
Down the left side we represent
a SIMD group as 32 lanes
starting with Lane 0.
A lane is a single thread
in a SIMD group.
Now let’s make this SIMD group
perform some work.
First we have all lanes
index an array, A, by its laneID
and store the result
in a variable X.
Note how each lane
has its own value of X.
In this execution model,
the instruction to load the data
from A is only fetched once
and executed simultaneously
by 32 threads
that have their own indices.
Now we read a second array, B,
indexed by laneID
and store the result in Y.
Finally we store the result
of multiplying X and Y
in a third array, C.
Since the instruction executed
is only fetched once
for the whole group,
all SIMD group threads
execute in lockstep.
SIMD group functions
allow each thread in the group
to inspect register values
of the entire SIMD group
with minimal overhead.
This ability allows
for some interesting functions.
First let’s introduce simd_max
and apply it to variable Y.
Each thread gets a Z value
with the largest value from Y,
as seen by any thread
in the SIMD group.
Next we have broadcast
and apply it to X.
In this example, we broadcast
the value of Lane 0
to all the other lanes
in a single operation.
Metal for A13 supports
many other similarly operating
SIMD functions
such as shuffle, permute,
and rotate across all lanes.
For our final example
we’ll take a look at simd_all,
which tells each lane
whether an expression evaluates
the same for all lanes.
In this example the Z variable
is indeed nine for all lanes,
and we therefore return true.
Likewise, simd_any tells whether
an expression evaluates to true
for any lane.
You can use simd_all to reduce
divergence in your shaders
by choosing to take
a more optimal path
when all threads
have the same need.
Let’s take a look
at an example.
Here is our fragment shader
from earlier
with some optimizations
using SIMD group functions.
To recap,
this function takes as inputs
the scene encoded
as an argument buffer,
uniforms, and the vertex
stage_in.
Typically, lighting functions
evaluate various components
of the final color differently
for transparent fragments
and thus require dynamic
control flow at various points.
Now, instead of evaluating
the opacity for every fragment,
here we use simd_all
to check dynamically
if all the threads
in the SIMD group
are computing the lighting
for opaque fragments.
If they are,
we take an optimal path
that assumes
only opaque objects.
And if not,
we fall back to the earlier path
that can light both opaque
and transparent fragments.
That’s it for SIMD group
functions on A13.
Let’s switch gears
and look at some of the exciting
additions to ASTC on A13.
As mentioned earlier
in the video,
the A13 GPU doubles the rate
of 16-bit floating point
operations
and adds support
for small 16-bit numbers
to better handle HDR processing.
Apps take advantage
of these improvements
without any modification;
HDR processing on the GPU just
gets faster and more accurate.
Apple Family 6 also adds support
for a new set of pixel formats
that support the efficient
storage and sampling of HDR data
called ASTC HDR.
ASTC is a texture compression
technology
supported on many platforms,
providing high texture
image quality
at a fraction of the bandwidth
and memory.
It does so by supporting
multiple bit rates
and input formats.
The ASTC
low dynamic range profile
has been supported
since Apple GPU Family 2
and is appropriate
for compressing values
in the zero to one range.
If your app is not already
using ASTC
to save memory
and bandwidth,
we highly encourage you
to do so.
The high dynamic range profile
is needed
to encode the larger brightness
values found in HDR images.
Without ASTC HDR,
such images are typically stored
in 16-bit floating
point pixel formats
at much higher memory cost.
So how much storage
can ASTC HDR save?
A lot.
Let’s consider an example.
HDR games often use
low-resolution cube map textures
to represent high dynamic range
environment maps
to light their scene,
and typically place
many such probes
across the game world or level.
Without ASTC HDR,
each probe can consume
a significant amount of memory,
and all such probes
can easily consume
a large portion
of your game’s memory budget.
In this example, a 256 by 256
probe cube map alone
consumes 3MB.
With ASTC HDR,
the same probe would consume
many times less memory.
You can even vary the bit rate
to really reduce the footprint.
Creating an HDR texture is
as simple as an LDR equivalent.
In this example, we’re creating
a four by four ASTC LDR texture.
There is matching HDR format
for every LDR format
so converting this
to an HDR texture
just requires changing
the pixel format.
All right, that wraps up
the new Metal features
for the A13 GPU.
Let’s recap what we’ve learned.
It enables higher quality
texture streaming
with sparse textures.
It lets you focus expensive
shading to where needed
with rasterization rate maps,
and eliminate redundant
vertex processing
with vertex amplification.
It also enables more flexible
GPU-driven pipelines
with argument buffer Tier 2,
and SIMD group sharing
with shuffle
and ballot instructions.
And finally, Metal now lets you
save memory in HDR pipelines
with ASTC.
For more information
about Metal,
the A13 GPU,
and to find our
latest sample code,
please visit
developer.apple.com.
Thank you.